
Biology is being revolutionized by new experimental techniques that have made
it possible to quantitatively query the inner workings of molecules, cells
and multicellular organisms in ways that were previously unimaginable. The
objective of this course is to respond to this deluge of quantitative data
through quantitative models and the use of biological numeracy. The course
will explore the description of a broad array of topics from modern biology
using the language of physics and mathematics. One style of thinking we will
emphasize imagines the kinds of simple calculations that one can do with a
stick in the sand.

<br/>
<br/>

We will draw examples from broad swaths of modern biology from our department
and beyond including cell biology (signaling and regulation, cell motility),
physiology (metabolism, swimming), developmental biology (patterning of body
plans, how size and number of organelles and tissues are controlled),
neuroscience (action potentials and ion channel gating) and evolution
(population genetics) in order to develop theoretical models that make
precise predictions about biological phenomena. These predictions will be
tested through the hands-on analysis of experimental data and by performing
numerical simulations using Python. Physical biology will be introduced as an
exciting new tool to complement other approaches within biology such as
genetics, genomics and structural biology. The course will introduce students
to the enabling power of biological numeracy in scientific discovery and make
it possible for them to use these tools in their own future research.
